---
layout: site_index
title: Home
---

# Home

<!---
<figure><img src="./assets/images/hugeonotation_logo_transparent.svg" class='logo_image'></figure>


![Huge O Notation Logo](){:
class="logo_image"}
-->

My name is Hugo. I'm a hobbyist programmer of nine years looking to enter the
field of software development. I received my bachelors in computer science from
the University of California: Riverside.

My interests are in working close to the hardware, computer graphics, and
writing performant code, commonly through the use of SIMD vectorization. I'm
particularly fond of C++ and Linux environments, although I also use Python and
Windows when appropriate.

My interest in programming was initially motivated by a more general interest in
computer graphics. Writing small scripts was useful for a project of mine, but
eventually this became more engaging than the original project. I started
familiarizing myself with APIs like OpenGL, as well as the fundamentals of
rendering theory and broader computer graphics knowledge. Today, I generally
make use of this knowledge in helping 3D artists understand and make good use of
their tools.

Some years back, I became interested in creating hand-optimized implementations
of various algorithms. I became fond of utilizing specialized CPU instructions,
particularly SIMD instructions, and leveraging knowledge of computer
architecture to maximize performance. In doing this, I became increasingly
familiar with modern CPUs' potential performance when programmed well, but also
with how little of this potential is leveraged in practice.

Recently I've developed an interest in programming language design. It seems
likely to me that a well-designed programming language may make it easier to
leverage the processing potential that is so commonly unused.

## Links:

[My Blog](./blog.html) - Discussions of some of the problems that have caught my attention.

<!---
[The Blender Shader Node Editor](./bn/toc.html)
-->
